testing/README.md, before:

# QEMU based integration testing

> This place is not a place of honor... no highly esteemed deed is commemorated here... nothing valued is here.
> What is here was dangerous and repulsive to us. This message is a warning about danger.

Testing other architectures is even more Fun than packaging for them. The scripts here make it plausible, if not exactly great.

## Prerequisites

1. Expect qemu to consume at least 1.2GiB of RAM in the worst case scenario.
2. Run `scripts/install-deps.sh` to install system level dependencies such as qemu. It assumes Debian, so you may need to substitute as necessary.
3. Your normal user is assumed to be able to run qemu & KVM. Usually this means belonging to the `kvm` group.

## Testing procedure

### Preamble

1. `cd` to the root of the `testing/` dir.
1. Download a GHA repo snapshot artifact zip and place it in the current directory as `kanidm_ppa_snapshot.zip`. Or, check the settings
   further down to test in other ways without a snapshot.

### Running the standard comformance test set the easy way

[Mise](https://mise.jdx.dev) is used to run a standardized set of dozens of test permutations.
For the full test, repeat it on all supported architectures.
Time taken will vary by system performance and how quickly you notice the
next permutation is up for test. A typical example for the author
if all cloud images are already cached and ample latency is factored in due
to multitasking is around 40 minutes.

1. Install Mise following these instructions: [Mise-en-place Getting Started](https://mise.jdx.dev/getting-started.html).
1. Copy `mise.local.toml.example` to `mise.local.toml` and configure `IDM_URI` & `SSH_PUBLICKEY`.
   They are explained better further down,
1. Launch the full test run: `mise run test_all` (Use `mise run` to see available modules.)
1. Wait for the test payload to finish setup, once it's tailing Kanidm debug logs it's ready.
1. In another terminal, launch the test sript: `mise run test_now && kill $(pgrep -f StrictHostKeyChecking)`
1. Either debug what went wrong with `mise run debug`,
   or if all was fine the permutation was already killed by the example
   above and the next one is launching, repeat the process.
1. You can retry individual failing combinations as well: `TEST_TARGETS=trixie mise run test:stable:ext`

### Running arbitrary tests the hard way without Mise

1. Run `IDM_URI=https://idm.example.com scripts/run-all.sh`, you may want to override other bits of env, see the bottom of this README.
   - At first your snapshot is unpacked and a mirror is launched with the contents listening on localhost.
   - You can view what's going on in the console of the qemu VM with `nc localhost 4321`, this is only necessary if something goes horribly wrong.
   - You can poke at the qemu console itself with `socat -,echo=0,icanon=0 unix-connect:qemu-monitor.socket` if something is even more wrong.
1. Once the VM is up and reachable, integration starts. Once it's following the kanidm-unixd, kanidm-unixd-tasks & sshd logs you're ready to test.
   If anything goes wrong, execution will pause instead with a warning to allow investigation.
1. Testing time.
   - A good basic test is to run in another terminal:

   ```shell
   ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null \
    localhost -p 2222 \
    "uname -a && cat /etc/os-release && kanidm login -D anonymous && kanidm self whoami"
   ```

   - Or if that doesn't work, troubleshoot via the cloud-init injected root key:

   ```shell
   ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null \
    -i ssh_ed25519 root@localhost -p 2222
   ```

1. Once happy with the permutation, hit `^C` in the original terminal to terminate the permutation. Hit `Enter` to continue to the next one.
1. Iterate until your willpower has crumbled or you reach the end of the target list.

### Known issues

- aarch64 is super slow cross-arch, so we disable cross-arch by default. Instead, run the same testing natively on an aarch64 platform and it'll work ok.
- We throw 4 cores for the cpu so that mounting the rootfs is fast enough to not time out on ubuntu. Yes, that's a crazy problem to have.
- If you insist in running aarch64 cross-arch, beware that systemd will throw weird hissyfits. The arguments try to work around it, but it's not foolproof.
- We expand every disk image a bit because some default image sizes only leave ~200MiB of free space which isn't enough for our deb sizes to go through dpkg copy logic.
  This makes GPT unhappy, but that seems to be ok.

### Config tweaks

You can set various environment variables to change testing behavior, either to suit your environment, or to test different things.
For example, `USE_DEBDIR` can be very helpful in rapid testing of packaging & code changes without waiting for a full snapshot
build from GHA, though less valuable for proving the PPA itself will be functional.

#### Testing different things

- `CATEGORY` - Which mirror category to install, `stable` (default) or `nightly`.
- `KANIDM_VERSION` - Version prefix to install from the category. `1.4` would install the latest available 1.4, say 1.4.6. The default is latest.
- `KANIDM_UPGRADE` - Set to `true` to test an upgrade within a `$CATEGORY` from `$KANIDM_VERSION` to
  the latest available.
- `USE_LIVE` - Use the live Kanidm PPA mirror instead of a local snapshot. Default is `false`.
- `USE_DEBDIR` - Instead of a mirror snapshot (the default) or the live mirror, install deb
  packages from the dir given with this option.
- `TEST_TARGETS` - Space separated list of distro targets to run. Defaults to running all applicable
  targets. See `lib/targets.sh` for valid targets.
- `ALLOW_UNSIGNED` - Accept an unsigned kanidm_ppa_snapshot.zip. Defaults to `true` but raises
  warnings.

#### Settings for your environment

- `IDM_URI` - Change which live kanidm server is used. Your user is expected to have SSH & posix enabled on this server.
  Set to `local` to spin up kanidmd within the VM and use that. This is not yet supported in all versions.
- `IDM_GROUP` - A posix enabled group on the above server to gate unixd authentication.
- `IDM_USER` - User expected to be able to log in, defaults to `$USER`.
- `SSH_PUBLICKEY` - The public key of `IDM_USER`. Used to seed a local kanidmd and test ssh
  integration in all scenarios.

#### Port settings

All ports are bound only on localhost, so should normally not interfere with other activity.

- `MIRROR_PORT` - 31625 - Port to use for the snapshot mirror httpd.
- `SSH_PORT` - 2222 - Port for the VM SSHD to listen on.
- `TELNET_PORT` - 4321 - Port for the VM console to listen on.
- `IDM_PORT` - 58915 - Port for the VM internal kanidmd. Only relevant if `IDM_URI=local`.

#### Internal-ish options

- `SERIAL_CONFIG` - Defaults to a telnet socket on $TELNET_PORT, but can be
  overriden to anything Qemu supports for the `-serial` flag.
- `PRETEND_TARGET` - Allows partially overriding target logic to run mixed configs,
  say installing trixie packages on top of sid.
- `SUCCESS_WAIT` - Defaults to true, flip to false to exit target without confirmation.

Commit message:

testing: Add helper tasks that speed up bulk testing
- test_loop: Run test_now, kill test on success and loop to the next
  after a delay
- mktable: Generate the table you may have seen in previous PRs.
- Hint in mise.local.toml.example for how to auto grab SSH keys, useful
  if you use multiple different keys at times

testing/README.md, after:

# QEMU based integration testing

> This place is not a place of honor... no highly esteemed deed is commemorated here... nothing valued is here.
> What is here was dangerous and repulsive to us. This message is a warning about danger.

Testing other architectures is even more Fun than packaging for them. The scripts here make it plausible, if not exactly great.

## Prerequisites

1. Expect qemu to consume at least 1.2GiB of RAM in the worst case scenario.
2. Run `scripts/install-deps.sh` to install system level dependencies such as qemu. It assumes Debian, so you may need to substitute as necessary.
3. Your normal user is assumed to be able to run qemu & KVM. Usually this means belonging to the `kvm` group.

## Testing procedure

### Preamble

1. `cd` to the root of the `testing/` dir.
1. Download a GHA repo snapshot artifact zip and place it in the current directory as `kanidm_ppa_snapshot.zip`. Or, check the settings
   further down to test in other ways without a snapshot.

### Running the standard comformance test set the easy way

[Mise](https://mise.jdx.dev) is used to run a standardized set of dozens of test permutations.
For the full test, repeat it on all supported architectures.
Time taken will vary by system performance and how quickly you notice the
next permutation is up for test. A typical example for the author
if all cloud images are already cached and ample latency is factored in due
to multitasking is around 40 minutes.

1. Install Mise following these instructions: [Mise-en-place Getting Started](https://mise.jdx.dev/getting-started.html).
1. Copy `mise.local.toml.example` to `mise.local.toml` and configure `IDM_URI` & `SSH_PUBLICKEY`.
   They are explained better further down,
1. Launch the full test run: `mise run test_all` (Use `mise run` to see available modules.)
1. Wait for the test payload to finish setup, once it's tailing Kanidm debug logs it's ready.
1. In another terminal, launch the test sript:
   - For example: `mise run test_now && kill $(pgrep -f StrictHostKeyChecking)`
   - Or for an opinionated fully automatic test loop: `mise run test_loop`
1. Either debug what went wrong with `mise run debug`,
   or if all was fine the permutation was already killed by the examples
   above and the next one is launching ready for a repeat.
1. You can retry individual failing combinations as well: `TEST_TARGETS=trixie mise run testcase:1e:stable:ext`

### Running arbitrary tests the hard way without Mise

1. Run `IDM_URI=https://idm.example.com scripts/run-all.sh`, you may want to override other bits of env, see the bottom of this README.
   - At first your snapshot is unpacked and a mirror is launched with the contents listening on localhost.
   - You can view what's going on in the console of the qemu VM with `nc localhost 4321`, this is only necessary if something goes horribly wrong.
   - You can poke at the qemu console itself with `socat -,echo=0,icanon=0 unix-connect:qemu-monitor.socket` if something is even more wrong.
1. Once the VM is up and reachable, integration starts. Once it's following the kanidm-unixd, kanidm-unixd-tasks & sshd logs you're ready to test.
   If anything goes wrong, execution will pause instead with a warning to allow investigation.
1. Testing time.
   - A good basic test is to run in another terminal:

   ```shell
   ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null \
    localhost -p 2222 \
    "uname -a && cat /etc/os-release && kanidm login -D anonymous && kanidm self whoami"
   ```

   - Or if that doesn't work, troubleshoot via the cloud-init injected root key:

   ```shell
   ssh -o StrictHostKeyChecking=no -o UserKnownHostsFile=/dev/null \
    -i ssh_ed25519 root@localhost -p 2222
   ```

1. Once happy with the permutation, hit `^C` in the original terminal to terminate the permutation. Hit `Enter` to continue to the next one.
1. Iterate until your willpower has crumbled or you reach the end of the target list.

### Known issues

- aarch64 is super slow cross-arch, so we disable cross-arch by default. Instead, run the same testing natively on an aarch64 platform and it'll work ok.
- We throw 4 cores for the cpu so that mounting the rootfs is fast enough to not time out on ubuntu. Yes, that's a crazy problem to have.
- If you insist in running aarch64 cross-arch, beware that systemd will throw weird hissyfits. The arguments try to work around it, but it's not foolproof.
- We expand every disk image a bit because some default image sizes only leave ~200MiB of free space which isn't enough for our deb sizes to go through dpkg copy logic.
  This makes GPT unhappy, but that seems to be ok.

### Config tweaks

You can set various environment variables to change testing behavior, either to suit your environment, or to test different things.
For example, `USE_DEBDIR` can be very helpful in rapid testing of packaging & code changes without waiting for a full snapshot
build from GHA, though less valuable for proving the PPA itself will be functional.

#### Testing different things

- `CATEGORY` - Which mirror category to install, `stable` (default) or `nightly`.
- `KANIDM_VERSION` - Version prefix to install from the category. `1.4` would install the latest available 1.4, say 1.4.6. The default is latest.
- `KANIDM_UPGRADE` - Set to `true` to test an upgrade within a `$CATEGORY` from `$KANIDM_VERSION` to
  the latest available.
- `USE_LIVE` - Use the live Kanidm PPA mirror instead of a local snapshot. Default is `false`.
- `USE_DEBDIR` - Instead of a mirror snapshot (the default) or the live mirror, install deb
  packages from the dir given with this option.
- `TEST_TARGETS` - Space separated list of distro targets to run. Defaults to running all applicable
  targets. See `lib/targets.sh` for valid targets.
- `ALLOW_UNSIGNED` - Accept an unsigned kanidm_ppa_snapshot.zip. Defaults to `true` but raises
  warnings.

#### Settings for your environment

- `IDM_URI` - Change which live kanidm server is used. Your user is expected to have SSH & posix enabled on this server.
  Set to `local` to spin up kanidmd within the VM and use that. This is not yet supported in all versions.
- `IDM_GROUP` - A posix enabled group on the above server to gate unixd authentication.
- `IDM_USER` - User expected to be able to log in, defaults to `$USER`.
- `SSH_PUBLICKEY` - The public key of `IDM_USER`. Used to seed a local kanidmd and test ssh
  integration in all scenarios.

#### Port settings

All ports are bound only on localhost, so should normally not interfere with other activity.

- `MIRROR_PORT` - 31625 - Port to use for the snapshot mirror httpd.
- `SSH_PORT` - 2222 - Port for the VM SSHD to listen on.
- `TELNET_PORT` - 4321 - Port for the VM console to listen on.
- `IDM_PORT` - 58915 - Port for the VM internal kanidmd. Only relevant if `IDM_URI=local`.

#### Internal-ish options

- `SERIAL_CONFIG` - Defaults to a telnet socket on $TELNET_PORT, but can be
  overriden to anything Qemu supports for the `-serial` flag.
- `PRETEND_TARGET` - Allows partially overriding target logic to run mixed configs,
  say installing trixie packages on top of sid.
- `SUCCESS_WAIT` - Defaults to true, flip to false to exit target without confirmation.
